# TWG 2023-01-12

[Prior meeting's notes](https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/blob/main/meetings/2022-11-10.md)

## Present

* Hécate
* John Ericson
* David Thrane Christiansen
* Luke McCartney
* Jack K

## Agenda

### Project Updates

* Advisory DB
    * No progress right now

* errors.haskell.org
    * Now supported by GHCup and Stack

### Open Proposals

#### Haddock/GHC Decoupling

* Meeting tomorrow to discuss it between Hécate and Laurent

#### IDE/Test Integration
 * TODO: facilitate contact between Davean and proposal author, because Davean has a useful and relevant prototype of aspects of the proposal

#### Standard Library Reform Proposal
https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/pull/47

* Where did the time estimate come from?
    * Based on work experience, done conservatively
* John: How do we feel about the first step being a big boring, and having that be the only funding proposal?
    * David: If the first step is all that happens, have we contributed value? Is the world better, worse, or neither?
        * John: Mostly neither
        * Gershom: Even if end user experience is not better, is there a better experience for core library devs and GHC devs?
        * John: Hopes so
        * Jack: Did the overall structure change?
        * John: The big update is adding this "get the PR over the finish line". Also, if Safe Haskell is removed, this gets cheaper and easier.
    * David: Do we have feedback from GHC devs and CLC about whether their lives are better with just this first step?
        * John: Recall hearing back from Bodigrim, who was fairly neutral, and Ben, who was positive
    * Gershom: If we did Step 1, and also a little bit of Step 2 (which can be incremental) then we would get an immediate benefit because we'd have a few things that could be upgraded without reinstalling GHC.
        * John: Technically yes (reinstallable and upgradable) but there are some gotchas for running TH natively and ABI compat. It's unclear how much leaks into the ABI of GHC itself. But if a stage1 compiler is fine, then yes.
        * Gershom: What's the ABI compatibility issue?
        * John: TH and parts of GHCi work by loading the user program into the GHC process, and they can do whatever. If a library that GHC uses were upgraded, then that could lead to problems.
        * Gershom: this is surprising. If I use Bytestring 11 on a a GHC that shipped with 10 and used TH, will that cause a bug?
        * John: It's only if you're using these things in the Template Haskell
        * Gershom: You need to use the bytestring that GHC is linked against? That's a problem today, right? You're your own worst salesman.
        * John: Yeah, that's right
        * Gershom: If we do step 1 and part of 2, then many things are actually improved.
        * The best demonstration would be to take out things that we regret having put in `base`
    * Gershom: Where does that leave the proposal?
        * John: There's a big "future work" section at the end that isn't formally asking for money
        * Remaining steps: 
        * Gershom suggestions:
            * Move prior work and motivation later
            * Put the actual proposal higher up in the document - today one must read to 6.1 to see the suggestion, and not until 7 does it say that there's no more! the first para should contain the actual concrete proposal, and then elaborate on it later (appendices, prior art, related work)
            * Fill out alternative prelude section
        * John: still needs to address David's comments

### Misc

#### Tooling thread

* John has made progress towards a reinstallable RTS, and triaging the details of the various configuration settings and options
* This should make the bindist metadata problem less daunting and more structured
* This should be generally useful for tooling

### Meta

 * How did the emailed reminders work?
 * Decision: try again another month

