# TWG 2023-08-11

[Last meeting's notes](https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/blob/main/meetings/2023-07-14.md)

# Meta

Evie is resigning; we will attempt to recruit a new member at or following ICFP. Gershom will encourage applications there.

# Project Updates

# Proposals

## Module Naming Conventions

https://github.com/haskellfoundation/tech-proposals/pull/53

* Things in the threads that have not made it to the proposal text (e.g. `Experimental` as suffix rather than prefix to module names)
* We prefer practical arguments over aesthetic ones
* The mental model of the prefix vs suffix is that prefix suggests a logical relationship between everything there, while the suffix suggests that the contents are related to things that otherwise exist elsewhere.
* There seems to be a consensus not to talk about the GHC API here
* David will add a summary of this discussion as a comment
* We think that sufficient stakeholders have been contacted


# Other

## Trees That Grow

FYI Laurant left comment here https://gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/ghc/-/issues/21592#note_519447

Idea for potential proposal: getting the full benefit from Trees That Grow, resulting in the AST in a library outside of GHC that GHC users and a parser that's also outside GHC. The big blocker is the user of `FastString`, a GHC string type that features interning of strings. Potential solutions: replace FastString with Text or similar (performance allowing), parameterize AST over a string type.

We suggest a really minimal proposal that says the goal is a separate package, and that it has one outstanding major concern to address. 

## Ways to Help Server Admin

Can we pay a company to lighten the load for Haskell admins?

 * Hackage and to a slightly lesser extent downloads seem to be very sensitive due to risk of software supply chain attacks
 * Someone good at email config and migration would be really valuable
 * Most other things are nixified - this makes it much easier to maintain

Two boxes we're concerned about that aren't Hackage or downloads: 90% nixified (www entirely, other than the Hoogle stuff). These aren't updated often. There are backups (done manually).

Most value seems to come from finishing the migration to the new mailman. Most of that is done but there's some open questions. If we can find a contractor who's open to taking over two nix boxes and is skilled at email stuff who can do the mailman migration and then continue to take over the Postfix migration.

Skills:
 * Mailmain
 * Postfix
 * Nix

We could start with a contract for the mailman migration, then if they work out, move onwards to more. We should have the conversation.

People to have in the conversation:
 * Gershom
 * Davean
 * Bryan
 * Ben G.

Suggestion: Haskell companies will have more people who are into this. Haskell company that does Nix? John says that Obsidian did in-house email until recently, so they exist.

Davean will put together a sketch of what's needed that we can use to get quotes.
